# 1. Computer Networks and the Internet

In this note, I summarize the chapter, which discusses the contents of the book at a super high level. 

Get back to [[toc CS168]]


This chapter looks at various pieces of hardware and software that make up the Internet and computer networks. We will be looking at the edge of the network first, loking at end systems and its applications, following the transport service provided to the applications running on the end systems. Then we will look at the technologies found in the access network, finally reaching into the network core, identifying packet switching and circuit switching as the two basic approaches for transporting data through a telecommunication network, analyzing the strengths and weaknesses of these approaches. The Internet’s hierarchical structure consists of higher and lower ISPs, which allow it to scale to include thousands of networks.

Then some introductory concepts of computer networking will be discussed. We will look at the causes of delay, throughput and packet loss in a packet-switched network, developing models for transmission, propagation, and queuing delays as well as for throughput. In addition, protocol layering and service models are key architectural principles in networking. Finally we will look at prevalent security attacks.

Sections in this Chapter:

[[1.1 What is the Internet?]]

[[1.2 The Network Edge]]

[[1.3 The Network Core]]

[[1.4 Delay, Loss, and Throughput in Packet-Switched Networks]]

[[1.5 Protocol Layers and Their Service Models]]

[[1.6 Networks Under Attack]]

[[1.7 History of Computer Networking and the Internet]]



