# 1.1 Expressions in the Terminal
This note introduces Python in your terminal, how it works at a high level. Get back to [[[toc CS61A]].

### Our Goal
Our goal here is simple. Type code into the terminal, and see it execute your code. Later on in the course, you'll see exactly how one might go about interpreting the code you type in your terminal. This is the Interpretation of Computer Programs, but as of now, we are interested in gaining prerequisite knowledge to understand the Structure of Computer Programs.

Open up whatever terminal you use. You can activate what we call an interactive Python session through the command `python3`. By interactive, I mean you can write code line-by-line and Python will read it as you put it in. You'll know if you are in a Python session if you see the triple greater than sign `>>>`. You can type in whatever mathematical expression you want (kind of like a more powerful calculator). Try putting some arithmetic expressions in the line and press ENTER. The result will be spit out on the line below, then Python will ask you for the next line.

```
>>> 2
2
>>> 2 + 2
4
>>> 24 - 12 * 2
0
>>>
```

You can exit out of a Python interactive session by typing in `exit()` on the input line. 

### Expression Evaluation

You can import modules in python with the `import` command. 

```
import add
>>> add(2, 3)
5
```

You can also nest calls inside of another

```
import add, mul
>>> add(1, 1)
2
>>> mul(2, add(1, 1))
4
```

Now, we can get very complicated and ask Python do do something like
`add(3, 4, mul(3, add(2, 4, mul(4, mul(8, 2)))), 9)`

How might we evaluate this expression? It might be easy for us to see what to do, but how would a computer look at something like this? Remember, must have a system to determine more complicated expressions like this. In fact there is one. You should get familiar with the following procedure for evaluating procedures

1. Evaluate the Operator: By this, I mean making sure the operator exists and is defined
2. Evaluate the Operands: The arguments in the function must fully be evaluated first. If the argument is another operation, you have to finish this procedure fully on that subexpression before you continue on.
3. Apply the Operator to the Operands: This is defined by whatever function. For `add` and `mul`, applying the operator to the operands just means doing the arithmetic operation. For other functions that we will create, it might involve more computation.

As a quick example, let's go through this procedure with the expression 
`add(mul(2, 3), add(1, 2))`

1. Evaluate the operator: add is a function.
2. Evaluate the operands: Ok, I see that the first subexpression evaluates to something I have to apply the procedure to first,
	1. Evaluate the operator: mul is a function
	2. Evaluate the operands: 2 is 2 and 3 is 3. 
	3. Apply the operator to the operands: mul(2, 3) is 6.
	
	That was just the first operand, we evaluate the second operand through the procedure again
	1. Evaluate the operator: add is a function
	2. Evaluate the operands: 1 is 1 and 2 is 2
	3. Apply the operator to the operands: add(1, 2) is 3

	The second operand is fully evaluated, now we go on to the third step
3. Apply add(6, 3): this is 9, so the result of this whole expression is 9.

I think you can see how this procedure goes with more complicated expressions, but this is a very important idea of execution. 