# 7. Finite State Machines

## Sequential Logic
Combinational logic is memoryless: the outputs only depend on the current inputs.

Sequential logic:

- Memory: outputs depend on both current and previous values of the inputs. Distills the prior inputs into a smaller amount of information i.e., states.

- State: the information about a circuit. Influences the circuit's future behavior, stored in flip-flops and latches. 

- FSMs: useful representation for designing sequential circuits. Output depends on present and past inputs

## Finite State Machines
FSMs are sequential circuits which has
1. External inputs
2. Externally visible outputs
3. Internal states

Consists of:
1. State register: stores current state, loads previously calculated next state. Number of states <= 2^(number of FFs)
2. Combinational logic: computes the next states and the outputs.

### FSM Gate Representation

### FSM Design Process
1. Specify the circuit function
2. Draw state transition diagram
3. Write down symbolic state transition table
4. Write down encoded state transition table
5. Derive logic equations
6. Derive circuit diagram: register to hold state; combinational logic for next state and outputs.

## Moore vs. Mealy FSMs
Although the next state is always determined by the current state and inputs, they may differ in output logic

- Moore FSM: outputs depend only on current state

- Mealy FSM: outputs depend on current state and inputs

## FSMs in Verilog
1. Specify circuit function
2. Draw state transition diagram
3. Write down symbolic state transition table
4. Assign encodings (bit patterns) to symbolic states
5. Code as Verilog behavioral description

- Use parameters to represent encoded states

- Use separate always blocks for register assignment and combinational logic block

- Use case statement for combinational logic. Within each case section (state), assign outputs and next state based on inputs.

