# 3. Wavefunctions
In this note describes the double-slit experiment, which directs us to the wavefunction. We will analyze consequences of the wavefunction framework.

## Double-Slit Experiment
The physical world can be more accurately described using a wave description. 
Waves can interfere and be superposed. In Young's double-slit experiment, we can determine one plane wave can be represented by

$$
\vec{E} = \vec{E}_0e^{i(\vec{k}\cdot\vec{r} - \omega t + \phi)}
$$

and we can add two waves together by addition. 

$$
\vec{E}_{tot} = \sum_{i = 1}^{N} \vec{E}_{o, i}e^{i\delta_i}
$$

We can also detect power or intensity by squaring the plane wave superposition. For two plane waves, the intensity is:

$$
\left|E\right|^2 = E_{o1}^2 + E_{o2}^2 + \vec{E}_{o1} \cdot \vec{E}_{o2}\left(e^{i(\delta_2 - \delta_1)} + e^{-i(\delta_2 - \delta_1)}\right)
$$

Note that we must add amplitudes not intensities. Also, notee observable pattern only depends on phase difference and not absolute phase.

## Quantum Wavefunction

$$
\Psi
$$

- Represents a wave amplitude

- Not physical! Cannot picture it as something wiggling

- Cannot observe it

- Contains all the informatio nabout the system

How to use it?

- $|\Psi|^2$ is the probability denbsity to find the system at $\vec{r}, t$. 

- Think of a large number of identical systems each with one particle

- Repeated measurements generates probability

$$
P(\vec{r}, t)  = |\Psi(\vec{r}, t)|^2
$$

- To find the particle within a chunk $d\vec{r}$, about $\vec{r}$ at time $t$ is

$$
P(\vec{r}, t)d\vec{r} = |\Psi(\vec{r}, t)|^2d\vec{r}
$$

## Wave Superposition
If $\Psi_1$ and $\Psi_2$ are two allowed states, then any linear combination is also allowed. 

$$
\Psi = c_1\Psi_1 + c_2\Psi_2
$$

The scalars can be complex numbers.

## Wavefunction for a Particle with Definite Momentum
We need to encode this information in waves.
## Probability and Normalization
